The fundamental difference with JSON APIs starts with the use of its own specific MIME Type — application/vnd.api+json— and I want to touch on another aspect here. When I started reading about JSON APIs, there was a lot of discussion titled “REST APIs Vs JSON APIs”. I find this rather odd. REST has a pretty broad definition. Really what’s fundamental to REST is the use of standard HTTP methods (not arbitrary ones like SOAP) on user defined resources. JSON APIs do not drift from this standard, in fact it mostly just adds the additional constraint of using this very specific MIME type identified above. This constrains the information interchange to follow a set standard.

With that covered, I want to discuss JSON APIs with what would be its potential use cases. JSON API targets cases where typical standard MIME type (think application/json) data exchange becomes too chatty. Lets talk about about that “chattiness” using an example here, and for simplicity I’ll use the same example used by jsonapi.org. Consider the example of a blog post site that displays a single article at a time, with links to next and previous articles of say the same author or a specific series. This page also displays comments from users on the article, and author information. If you were to write an API to return this info to cater specifically for this requirement, you would potentialy have a GET on a resource named /articles that returns a list of all articles, and another implementation of a GET on a resource named /articles/{id} and the payload for this second GET would look something like this:


I oversimplify the payload up here, but this can get pretty verbose pretty quickly. A massive article, 100s of comments, etc. And this is on a simple blog post example with nothing other than article, author and comments shown as entities. So you would never implement an API that looks like the above. You would potentially expose a number of resources — /articles/{id}, /author, /comment for example. And there would be a number of back and forth calls before you have everything you need to display your one blog post page. In other words, the information exchange very quickly becomes chatty, which is probably perfectly fine and that’s the intended implementation. But JSON APIs takes a different approach here.

Now, lets look at the example that jsonapi.org uses for this very same case.


The application/vnd.api+json mime type has a very specific structure to it. If you carefully observe, it is like data from different relational tables all jammed into a single payload. Think of this payload above as the result of a GET on a master resource called /articles. This is the one payload you need in order to get everything there is to get about all articles within the blog post repository (I know it souds crazy, I’ll get to it). I’ll discuss some highlights of this payload , but not get too much into the details:

The links.self key above is a self link to the /articles resource.
data array is additional details about each article. The example payload above has only one article, but it can be any number.
data[0].relationships describes all relationships to the parent element described within data[0].
included array element then describes each of the entity described within the data array.
A similar payload can be returned using a standard application/json MIME type as well. Then why use the JSON API specific MIME? The answer is, this MIME allows you to slice and dice the payload shown above (imagine details of a 1000 articles in that payload) using a parameterized HTTP request. You can even sort, paginate, create, update and delete resources, all using a single resource end point. Here’s an example of selective field retireval:

GET /articles?include=author&fields[articles]=title,body&fields[people]=name HTTP/1.1 Accept: application/vnd.api+json
In this example, all articles are being requested, and author is explicitly being included, and only the title attribute of article is being requested and only name attribute of people is being requested. You can also filter data using HTTP request parameters and creating endpoints within. To request a single article you would doGET /articles/{id} without separately implementing a resource endpoint for the same. Needless to say you can again sparse fieldsets, sort, etc.

I hope you enojyed reading this and understood the additional advantage that JSON APIs bring in certain situations!